# 3.How to talk about personality types

***
[TOC]
***

## session 1  

1. **egoist** —— me first  
2. **egotist** —— the height of conceit  
3. **altruist** —— let me help you  
4. **introvert** —— leave me alone
5. **extrovert** —— let's do it together
6. **ambivert** —— neither extreme
7. **misanthrope** —— people are no damn good
8. **misogynist** —— women are no damn good
9. **misogamist** —— marriages is an institution,and who to live in an institution
10. **ascetic** —— "that the flesh is heir to"

***

## session 2

1. **ego** (*Latin root*, meaning **I**)
   * *I* is the greatest concern in **egoist**'s mind
   * the most overused word in **egotist**'s vocabulary
   * ==difference==
     * Keep the word differentiated in you mind by think of the **t** in talk, and the additional t in **egotist**
   * **egocentric**
     * consider yourself the center of the universe —— you are an extreme form of the **egoist**
     * *n* and *adj*
   * **egomaniac**
     * carry **egoism** to such an extreme that you need, desires, and interests have become a morbid obsession, a **mania**
     * *adj* **egomaniacal**  
   * ==difference==
     * the **egoist** or **egotist** is obnoxious
     * the **egocentric** is intolerable
     * the **egomaniac** is dangerous and slight mad
&nbsp;
2. **alter** (*Latin root*, meaning **other**)
      * **altruism**
        * the philosophy practiced by **altruist**
      * **altruistic**
        * actions look toward the benefit of *others*
      * **alternate**
        * skip one and take the *other*
      * **alternative**
        * you have *other* choice
      * **alteration**
        * a change
        * a making into something *other*
      * **alter**
        * **alter** your plan, you make *other* plans
      * **altercation**
        * a verbal dispute
        * you have an **altercation** with sb, you have a violent disagreement, a "fight" with words, because you have *other* ideas, plans, or opinions than those of the person on the *other* side of the argument
        * ==difference==
          * **altercation** is stronger than **quarrel** or **dispute**
          * the sentiment is more heated, the disagreement is likely to be angry or even hot-tempered, there may be recourse, if the disagreements are human, to profanity or obscenity.
          * over pretty important issues, and the word implies that you get quite excited.
      * **alter ego**
        * **alter** + **ego** = *other* + *I*
        * refer to sb with whom you are so close that you both do the same things, think alike, react similarly, and are, in temperament, almost mirror images of each other.
        * such friend is your *other I*, your **alter ego**
  
### Key word 1

1. **ego**
2. **egocentric**
3. **egomaniac**
4. **egomaniacal**
5. **altruism**
6. **altruistic**
7. **to alternate (*v*)**
8. **alternate (*n* or *adj*)**
9. **alternative**
10. **alteration**
11. **to alter**
12. **altercation**
13. **alter ego**  

***

## session 3

1. **verto** (*Latin verb*, meaning *to turn*)
   * **introvert**, **extrovert**, and **ambivert** are built on **verto**
   * you thoughts are constantly *turn* inward (**intro-**), you are an **introvert**
   * *turn* outward (**extro-**), you are an **extrovert**
   * in both directions (**ambi-**), an ambivert
   * **ambidextrous**
     * able to use both hands with equal skill
     * *n* **ambidexterity**
   * **dexterous** meaning **skillful**
     * *n* **dexterity** meaning **skill**
     * **-ous** is common *adj* suffix
     * **-ity** is common *n* suffix
     * ==Spelling caution==
       * the letter following the **t-** in **ambidextrous** is **-r**, but in **dexterous** is **-e**
   * **dexter** (*Latin word*, **right hand**)
     * **left-handed** is still used as a synonym of **awkward**
   * **sinister** (*Latin word*, **left hand**)
     * the same word, in English means **threatening**, **evil**, or **dangerous**, a further commentary on our early suspiciousness of left-handed persons
   * **gauche** (*French word*, **left hand**)
     * invest it with an uncomplimentary meaning
     * call sb **gauche** imply clumsiness, generally social rather than physical
     * a **gauche** remark is tactless
     * a **gauche** offer of sympathy is so bumbling as to be embarrassing
     * **gaucherie** is an awkward, clumsy, tactless, embarrassing way of saying things or of handling situations
     * the **gauche** person is totally without finesse
   * **droit** (*French word*, **right hand**)
     * **adroit**, like **dexterous**, meaning **skillful**, but especially in the exercise of the mental facilities
     * *n* adroitness, usually is used figuratively
     * the adroit person is quick-witted, can get out of difficult spots cleverly, can handle situations ingeniously
     * **adroitness** is the opposite of **gaucherie**  
&nbsp;

2. love, hate, and marriage
   * **misanthrope**, **misogynist**, and **misogamist** is built on **misein** (*Greek root*, **to hate**)
   * **misanthrope** hates mankind (**anthropos**, *Greek*, mankind)
     * **anthropology**, the study of the development of the human race
     * **philanthropist**, one who loves mankind and shows such love by donating time and energy to helping those in need
   * **misogynist** hates woman (**gyne**, *Greek*, **woman**)
     * **gynecologist**, the medical specialist who treats females disorders
   * **misogamist** hates marriage (**gamos**, *Greek*, **marriage**)
     * **monogamy**, (**monos**, meaning **one**)
       * the custom of only *one* marriage (at a time)
     * **bigamy**, (**bi-**, meaning **two**)
       * is two marriages
       * in actuality, the unlawful act of contracting another marriage without divorcing one's current legal spouse
     * **polygamy**, (**polys**, meaning many)
       * many marriage, and therefore etymologically denoting plural marriage for either males or females
       * this custom is **polygyny**
         * **polys** + **gyne** = *many* + *woman*
       * custom **polyandry**
         * **polys** + **andros** (*Greek* **male**) = *many* + *male*
&nbsp;

3. making friend with suffixes
   Person|Practices, etc|*adj*
   :-:|:-:|:-:
   misanthrope or misanthropist|misanthropy|misanthropic
   misogynist|misogyny|misogynous or misogynistic
   gynecologist|gynecology|gynecological|
   monogamist|monogamy|monogamous
   bigamist|bigamy|bigamous
   polygamist|polygamy|polygamous
   polygynist|polygyny|polygynous
   polyandrist|polyandry|polygynous
   philanthropist|philanthropy|philanthropic
   anthropologist|anthropology|anthropological
   * **-ist** is a common suffix for a person
   * **-y** for a practice, attitude, etc
   * **-ic** or **-ous** for an *adj*
&nbsp;

4. living alone and liking it  
   * **ascetic** is from **asketes** (*Greek*word, meaning **monk** or **hermit**)
   * **ascetic** who leads an existence, voluntarily of course, that compares in austerity, simplicity, and rigorous hardship with the life of a monk
   * the practice is **asceticism**
     * *adj* **ascetic**

### Etymology 1

Suffix|Meaning|Example
:-:|:-:|:-:
**ego**|self, I|egocentric
**alter**|other|altruism
**intro-**|inside|introvert
**extro-**|outside|extrovert
**verto**|turn|ambivert
**ambi-**|both|ambidextrous
**misein**|hate|misanthrope
**anthropos**|mankind|philanthropy
**gyne**|woman|gynecologist
**gamos**|marriage|monogamy
**asketes**|monk|asceticism
**centrum**|center|egocentric
**mania**|madness|egomaniac
**dexter**|right hand|dexterous
**sinister**|left hand|
**gauche**|left hand|gaucherie
**droit**|right hand|adroit
**monos**|one|monogamist
**bi-**|two|bigamy
**polys**|many|polyandry
**andros**|male|polyandrist
**-ist**|person who (*n* suffix)|misogynist
**-y**|Practice, custom, etc|anthropology
**-ous**|*adj* suffix|bigamous
**-ity**|quality, condition, etc (*n* suffix)|dexterity

### Key word 2

1. **ambidextrous**
2. **ambidexterity**
3. **dexterous**
4. **dexterity**
5. **sinister**
6. **gauche**
7. **gaucherie**
8. **adroit**
9. **adroitness**
10. **anthropology**
11. **anthropologist**
12. **anthropological**
13. **philanthropist**
14. **philanthropy**
15. **philanthropic**
16. **gynecologist**
17. **gynecology**
18. **gynecological**
19. **monogamist**
20. **monogamy**
21. **monogamous**

### Key word 3

1. **bigamist**
2. **bigamy**
3. **bigamous**
4. **polygamist**
5. **polygamy**
6. **polygamous**
7. **polygynist**
8. **polygyny**
9. **polygynous**
10. **polyandrist**
11. **polyandry**
12. **polyandrous**
13. **misanthropist**
14. **misanthropy**
15. **misanthropic**
16. **misogyny**
17. **misogynous**
18. **misogynistic**
19. **misogamy**
20. **misogamous**
21. **asceticism**

### Amateur etymologist

1. **anthropocentric**
   * built on **anthropos**(**mankind**) + **kentron**(*Greek*, center) + **-ic**(*adj* suffix)
   * describes thinking, assumptions, reasoning, etc, that see mankind as the central fact, or ultimate aim, of the universe
   * *n* **anthropocentrism** or **anthropocentricity**
2. **andromania**
   * **andros**(**male**) + **mania**(**madness**)
   * signifies an obsession with males
   * person **andromaniac**, one who is mad about men
   * *adj* **andromaniacal**
3. **gynandrous**
   * **gyne**(**woman**) + **andros**(**male**)
   * describes:
     * plants in which the male and female organs are united in the same column
     * people who physically have both male and female sexual organs, often one or both in rudimentary form
     * (**a more recent meaning**) people who exhibit, or are willing to own up to, the male and female **emotional** characteristics that everyone possesses
   * *n* **gynandry**
   * **androgynous**
     * with all three meaning identical to those of **gynandrous**
     * *n* **androgyny**
   * **hermaphroditic**
     * **Hermes**(the Greek god who served as messenger or herald) + **Aphrodite**(the Greek goddess of love and beauty)
       * in Roman mythology, this god was known as **Mercury**, and is conventionally pictured with wings on his heels
       * in Roman mythology, **Venus**
     * has either of the first two meaning of **gynandrous**
     * *n* **hermaphroditism**
   * **andrognye** ==#查不到#==
     * the individual plant
   * **hermaphrodite**
     * the plant or person
4. **monomania**
   * **monos**(**one**) + **mania**(**madness**)
   * is an obsession with one thing, or obsessiveness in one area
   * *person* **monomaniac**
   * *adj* **monomaniacal**
5. **misandrist**
   * **misein**(**to hate**) + **andros**(**male**) = hates men
   * *n* **misandry**
   * *adj* **misandrous**

### Etymology 2

Root|Meaning|Example
:-:|:-:|:-:
**anthropos**|mankind|anthropocentric
**kentron**|center|anthropocentrism
**andros**|male|andromania
**mania**|madness|andromaniac
**gyne**|woman|gynandrous
**Hermes**|the messenger of the gods|hermaphrodite
**Aphrodite**|goddess of love and beauty|hermaphroditic
**monos**|one|monomania
**misein**|to hate|misandry  

***
