# 4.How to talk about doctors

***
[TOC]
***

## session 4

1. **internist** —— What's wrong with you?
2. **gynecologist** —— Female troubles?
3. **obstetrician** —— Having a baby?
4. **pediatrician** —— Is your baby ill?
5. **dermatologist** —— Skin clear?
6. **ophthalmologist** —— Eyes okay?
7. **orthopedist** —— How are your bones?
8. **cardiologist** —— Does your heart go pitter-patter?
9. **neurologist** —— Is your brain working?
10. **psychiatrist** —— Are you neurotic?

***

## session 5

1. inside you  
   * **internist** and **internal** derive from **internus**(*Latin root*, **inside**)
   * **internist** is a specialist in **internal** medicine, in the exploration of your *insiders*
   * **intern**(also spelled **interne**), who is a medical graduate serving an apprenticeship *inside* a hospital
&nbsp;
2. doctors for woman
   * **gynecologist** is built on **gyne**(*Greek*, **woman**)  
   * **gynecology**
     * **gyne**(*Greek*, **woman**) + **logos**(**science**)
     * the science(in actual use, the medical science) of woman
     * *adj* **gynecological**
   * **obstetrician** derive from **obstetrix**(*Latin*, **midwife**, which in turn has its source in *Latin verb*, meaning **to stand**)
     * **midwife** stand in front of the woman in labor to aid in the delivery of the infant
     * suffix **-ician**, means **expert**
   * **obstetrics** #产科学#
     * *adj* **obstetric** or **obstetrical**
&nbsp;
3. children
   * **pediatrician** is a combination of **paidos**(*Greek*, **child**)
     * **iatreia**(**medical healing**)
     * **-ician**(**expert**)
   * **pediatrics**, is by etymology the medical healing of a child.
     * *adj* **pediatric**
   * ==notice==
     * **ped-** in **pedestal**, **pedal**, and **pedestrian** is from **pedis**(*Latin*, **foot**), and despite the identical spelling in English has no relationship to *Greek* **paidos**
   * **pedagogy**,
     * **paidos** + **agogos**(**leading**)= **the leading of children**
     * refers actually to the principles and methods of teaching
     * *adj* **pedagogical**
   * **pedagogue**
     * is versed in **pedagogy**
     * has an unhappy history
     * its original, neutral meaning of teacher, it has deteriorated to a narrow-minded, strait-laced, old-fashioned, dogmatic teacher
     * It is a word of contempt and should be used with caution
   * **demagogue** has also deteriorated in meaning.
     * **demos** + **agogos** = **people** + **leader**
     * actually one who attempts, in essence, to **mislead** the people, a politician who foments discontent among the masses, rousing them to fever pitch by wild oratory, in an attempt to be voted into office
     * once elected, **demagogues** use political power to further their own personal ambitions or fortunes
   * **demagoguery** #煽动行为#
     * *adj* **demagogic**
&nbsp;
4. skin-deep
   * **dermatologist**, whose specialty is **dermatology**, is from **derma**(*Greek*, **skin**)
     * *adj* **dermatological**
   * **hypodermic** needle #皮下注射器针头#  
     * **hypos**(*Greek*, **under**)
     * *under* the *skin*
   * **epidermis** #最外层皮肤#
     * the outermost layer of *skin*
   * **taxidermist** #动物标本剥制师#
     * whose business is **taxidermy**, prepares, stuffs, and mounts the *skin* of animal
   * **pachyderm** #厚皮类动物#
     * an animal with an unusually thick *skin*, like elephant, hippopotamus, or rhinoceros
   * **dermatitis**
     * the general name for any *skin* inflammation, irritation, or infection
&nbsp;
5. the eyes have it
   * **ophthalmologist**  
     * **ph** preceding **th** —— **ophthalmos**(*Greek*, **eye**) + **logos**(**science** or **study**)
     * the specialty is **ophthalmology**
       * *adj* **ophthalmological**
   * **oculist**
     * an earlier title for this physician, still occasionally used
     * **oculus**(*Latin*, **eye**)
     * **ocular** —— an *adj* that refers to the eye
     * **monocle** —— a lens for **monos**(**one**) eye, sported by characters in old movies as a symbol of the British so-called upper class
     * **binoculars** —— field glasses that increase the range of **bi-**(**two**) eyes
     * **inoculate**, a word commonly misspelled with two **n**, when you are **inoculated** against a disease, an *eye*, puncture, or hole is made in your skin, through which serum is injected
   * ==notice==
     * **optometrist**
       * not physicians, and do not perform surgery or administer drugs
       * they measure vision, test for glaucoma, and prescribe and fit glasses
       * **opsis**，**optikos**（*Greek*，**sight** or **vision**） + **metron**(**measurement**) = one who measures vision
       * specialty is **optometry** #验光#
     * **optician**  
       * fill an **optometrist**'s or **ophthalmologist**'s prescription, grinding lenses according to specifications
       * they do not examine patients  
       * **opsis**，**optikos**(**vision**) + **-ician**(**expert**)
       * specialty is **optics** #光学#
     * *adj* **optometric**, **optometrical** or **optical**  

### Key word 1

1. **intern(e)**
2. **gynecology**
3. **gynecological**
4. **obstetrics**
5. **obstetric**
6. **obstetrical**
7. **pediatrics**
8. **pediatric**
9. **pedagogy**
10. **pedagogical**
11. **pedagogue**
12. **demagogue**
13. **demagoguery**
14. **demagogic**

### Key word 2

1. **dermatology**
2. **dermatological**
3. **hypodermic**
4. **epidermis**
5. **taxidermist**
6. **taxidermy**
7. **pachyderm**
8. **dermatitis**
9. **ophthalmology**
10. **ophthalmological**
11. **oculist**
12. **ocular**
13. **monocle**
14. **binoculars**
15. **inoculate**
16. **optometrist**
17. **optometry**
18. **optometric**
19. **optometrical**
20. **optician**
21. **optics**
22. **optical**

### Etymology 1

Prefix, Root, Suffix|Meaning|English word
:-:|:-:|:-:
**internus**|insider|internist
**gyne**|woman|gynecologist
**obstetrix**|midwife|obstetrician
**paidos**|child|pediatrician
**pedis**|foot|pedal
**agogos**|leading, leader|pedagogy
**demos**|people|demagogue
**derma**|skin|dermatologist
**hypos**|under|hypodermic
**ophthalmos**|eye|ophthalmologist
**oculus**|eye|oculist
**monos**|one|monocle
**bi-**|two|binoculars
**-ician**|expert|pediatrician
**opsis**, **optikos**|vision, slight|optician
**metron**|measurement|optometrist

***

## session 6

1. the straighteners
   * **orthopedist**  
      * **orthos**(*Greek*, **straight** or **correct**) + **paidos**(**child**) = straighten children
      * *adj* **orthopedic**  
   * **orthodontia**
     * the straightening of teeth
     * **orthos** + **odontos**(**tooth**)
   * **orthodontist**
     * specialize in improving your "bite", retracting "buck teeth", and by means of braces and other techniques seeing to it that every molar, incisor, bicuspid, ect, is exactly where it belongs in your mouth  
&nbsp;
2. the heart
   * **cardiologist**
     * **kardia**(*Greek*, **heart**) + **logos**(**science**)  
     * specialty is **cardiology**
     * *adj* **cardiological**
   * **cardiac**
     * condition refer to some malfunctioning of the heart
   * **cardiogram**
     * an electrically produced record of the heartbeat
   * **cardiograph**
     * the instrument that produces this record
&nbsp;
3. the nervous system
   * **neurologist**
      * **neuron**(*Greek*, **nerve**) + **logos**(**science**)
      * specialty is **neurology**
      * *adj* **neurological**
   * **neuralgia**
     * acute pain along the nerves and their branches
     * **neuron** + **algos**(**pain**)
   * **neuritis**
     * inflammation of the nerves
   * **neurosis** #神经衰弱症#
     * **neuron** + **-osis**(**abnormal** or **diseased condition**)
     * is not a disorder of the nerves, but rather, as a mental illness that makes someone unreasonably worried or frightened
     * *adj* **neurotic**  
       * the term for a person suffering from neurosis
&nbsp;
4. the mind
   * **neurosis**
     * is not a form of mental unbalance
   * **psychosis**
     * a full-blown mental disorder  
     * **psyche**(*Greek*, **spirit**、**soul** or **mind**) + **-osis**(**abnormal** or **diseased condition**)
   * **psychotic**
     * has lost contact with reality
     * both *n* and *adj*
   * **psychiatrist**
     * **psyche** + **iatreia**(**medical healing**) = a mind-healer
     * the specialty is **psychiatry**
     * *adj* **psychiatric**
   * **pediatrics**
     * **iatreia**  
   * **podiatry**(discussed in next chapter)  
   * **geriatrics**
      * the specialty dealing with the particular medical needs of the elderly
      * **iatreia** + **geras**(*Greek*, **old age**)
      * the specialist is a **geriatrician**
      * *adj* **geriatric**  

### Etymology 2

Root, Suffix|Meaning|English word
:-:|:-:|:-:
**orthos**|straight, correct|orthopedist
**paidos**(**ped-**)|child|pediatrician
**odontos**|tooth|orthodontist
**kardia**|heart|cardiologist
**logos**|science, study|cardiology
**neuron**|nerve|neurologist
**algos**|pain|neuralgia
**-osis**|abnormal or diseased condition|neurosis
**-itis**|inflammation|dermatitis
**psyche**|spirit, soul, mind|psychosis
**iatreia**|medical healing|psychiatrist
**geras**|old age|geriatrics

### Key word 3

1. **orthopedics**
2. **orthopedic**
3. **orthodontia**
4. **orthodontist**
5. **orthodontic**
6. **cardiology**
7. **cardiological**
8. **cardiac**
9. **cardiogram**
10. **cardiograph**

### Key word 4

1. **neurology**
2. **neurological**
3. **neuralgia**
4. **neuritis**
5. **neurosis**
6. **neurotic**
7. **psychosis**
8. **psychotic**
9. **psychiatry**
10. **psychiatric**
11. **geriatrics**
12. **geriatrician**
13. **geriatric**

### Amateur etymologist

1. **pedodontia**
   * the specialty of child dentistry
   * **paidos**(**child**) + **odontos**(**tooth**)  
   * specialist **pedodontist**
   * *adj* **pedodontic**
2. **cardialgia**
   * heart pain
   * **kardia**(**heart**) + **algos**(**pain**)
3. **odontalgia**
   * toothache
4. **nostalgia**
   * **nostos**(*Greek*, **return home**) + **algos**(**pain**)
   * homesick
   * *adj* **nostalgic**

### Etymology 3

Prefix, Root|Meaning|Example
:-:|:-:|:-:
**paidos**(**ped-**)|child|pedodontia
**kardia**|heart|cardialgia
**algos**|pain|odontalgia
**odontos**|tooth|pedodontist
**nostos**|return|nostalgia

***
